# DopplerSpectroscopy

In the field of Astrophysics, exoplanets are at the cutting age of research. More than 3000
exoplanets have been discovered in our Galaxy and university and NASA researchers are currently investing large amounts of resources to further this research. My group proposed research that focused on determining the habitability of an exoplanet, specifically using the Doppler Spectroscopy method and creating a live simulation of an actual exoplanet orbiting the star. Using the exoplanet data captured by the NASA Kepler Space Telescope in the last seven years, we wanted to test whether the Doppler Spectrometry method is yielding consistant measurements and through those measurements determine the habitability of the exoplanet. The research question was, “how can we determine the habitability of an exoplanet through Doppler spectroscopy method?”

I am interested in learning more about exoplanets, which are earthlike planets that can potentially lead to the colonization of different planets beyond our solar system. The next step in discovering more exoplanets is determining whether the planets are habitable for life or not; and whether we, can survive in that environment. Current research focuses on being able to determine their ability to sustain life through analyzing the data recovered by the famous Kepler Telescope. Scientists are currently using photometric measurements and radial velocity to determine the planets size and composition. Metrics like radial velocity and photometric measurements allow for further exploration on whether or not exoplanets are habitable for oxygen-breathing life forms.

From the discovery of the first exoplanet in 1992 to the present, over three thousand exoplanets have been discovered, and Doppler Spectroscopy has been the second best method in yielding these results. Given the success of the Doppler Spectroscopy method, we grew interested in using the method in our research. Although the Transit method yielded far greater results than the Doppler Spectroscopy method, we felt like the strategy surrounding the Doppler Spectroscopy method was easier to understand for two sophomores in college.

The Doppler Spectroscopy method is dependent on the concept that when a planet orbits a star, the star is not completely stationary. Instead the star is slightly moving due to the gravitational pull the planet exerts on the star. Therefore, if the planet’s mass is huge the star is expected to move more. These movements have an affect on the stars light in regards to red shift and blue shift. For instance, if the star is moving close to an observer the light is blue shifted and if the star is moving away then the light is red shifted. Using this data one is able to calculate the approximate period of the planet.
Initially our project was suppose to fully embody the Doppler Spectroscopy method, and we were suppose to use the information we gathered to incorporate it into determining the habitability of the planet, and the simulation of the planet star orbit. 

Our simulation relied on solving for an ordinary differential equation (Newton’s Law of Gravitation). By solving this differential equation my group was able to gather the position and velocity of both the planet and the star. Solving the differential equation was manageable through the use of scipy.integrate.odeint, which takes the initial conditions of the differential equation and solves the differential equation, in our case returning the velocity and position of the two-body orbit. The difficult part of this process was learning how to animate the simulation, because neither my partner nor I had any experience in animation and the course did not touch on the topic. As a result, a lot of time was spent figuring out how to animate the simulation.

To animate our simulation, we used matplotlib.animate, which took in the information given from our odeint function and created an animation. To use this feature we had to download FFMPEG so that Python can save the animation into a file. I was able to download FFMPEG by first downloading a program called homebrew, which simplified the process of downloading FFMPEG. First I had to paste, “ /usr/bin/ruby -e "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/master/install)"” into my terminal to download homebrew, then once I had homebrew I simply, typed “brew install ffmpeg” onto the same terminal and it automatically downloaded the file. However, my partner Andre was not able to get FFMPEG working onto his computer so we had to work off of my computer to figure out the animation. This was probably the hardest setback to overcome because neither of us had any animation experience and now we only had one available computer, so we decided to split up the work in order to save time. I would work on the simulation and animation while he focused on calculating the period of the planet.
In the end we managed to successfully simulate and animate a two-body orbit of planet 14 and B (An actual exoplanet), through the data collected from the NASA website. My partner and I used the planets and stars mass, as a given measurement but in reality that is something that should have been calculated. However, we were only able to calculate the period of the exoplanets orbit by calculating the redshift data for light emitted by a star and analyzing it through the Fourier spectrum. Once we found the period we managed to calculate the semi major axis of the orbit using Kepler’s third law.

Our original idea of what our project would look like was a bit out of reach given the time restraint and different issues me nor my partner were unable to foresee at the start of the project. We were not able to determine the habitability of the planet with the data that our code provided but through the process we managed to gain a lot of experience with animation, simulations, differential equations, Fourier analysis, orbits, etc. Although we did not reach our goal I hope we can one day finish the project and use it to analyze different exoplanets.
 
### Works Cited
Lovis, Christophe, Michel Mayor, and Nuno C. Santos. "Doppler Spectroscopy as a Path to the Detection of Earth-like Planets." Nature. Macmillan Publishers Limited, 18 Sept. 2014. Web. <https://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v513/n7518/pdf/nature13780.pdf?origin=ppub>.
